(gentle music)
If you could have a user's guide to your brain
would you use it?
Rick Hanson, Neurophysiologist, and author of Buddha's Brain
has written just such a guide.
It explains in simple and compassionate terms
how our brains are naturally wired,
and some of the simple things we can do
to begin programming them from negativity
to peace and contentment.
And, we can all do it.
Before I even begin the interview,
I wanted to tell you just a wee story
that happened the other day
while I was researching your book for this interview,
which was perfect timing.
It had to do with my son and his girlfriend,
and they were looking over some problematic elements
as young entrepreneurs, and some stuck attitudes,
and she said, "I just have to snap out of it, don't I?"
And I said, "Ah, ah-ha, I'm reading this book,
"easier said than done.
"Sometimes we can't just snap out of it
"because there's a lot going on
"in this programmed behavior of ours."
So, your background in neurophysiology,
as well as with a long tradition of meditation.
You bring the two worlds together in a really beautiful way.
This is a wonderful user's manual for the brain.
Plus I've been a therapist for a long time.
And a dad and a husband.
Oh, that's it, that's where it comes from.
That's the real training--
That's the training. (laughing)
Have a long-term marriage with young adult kids.
So tell us a little background
about why you decided to write the book Buddha's Brain.
'Cause people are really relating to it.
Yeah, thank you.
I've always been interested in what would make people happy.
I mean, I was selfishly interested, I wanted to be happy.
Broadly defined happy,
not like go to Disneyland for one day happy,
but deeply contented in a way
that was relatively unshakable.
I mean, that would respond to situations,
but had a core to it
that felt fulfilled and grounded and clear.
So then the question becomes how to actually do that.
So I engaged a lot of inquiries around it,
and increasingly, the whole idea of putting together
modern brain science, which is historically unprecedented,
the explosion of information in that realm.
Put that together with positive psychology,
which has been 100 years old at least,
certainly the last 30 to 40,
and then put that together with thousands of years
of contemplative practice.
People hard-core training the mind.
They didn't have EEG's, they didn't know microscopes,
they didn't have MRI's,
but they knew they could do certain things
to activate these very reliable and profound states
of well-being, love, and wisdom.
What neuroscience can do is to reverse engineer.
In other words, if you can start to understand
what's happening inside the brains of people
when they're in a peak performance mode,
or when they're really happy,
or when they're working through some upset,
or when they're snapping out of something, right?
If you can understand what's going on
in their brain when they're doing that,
then you can work backwards and think,
"Hmm, how can I use my mind?"
Not drugs.
"How can I use my mind alone to stimulate and strengthen
"those underlying neural states that promote
"the mental states I really care about?"
And if you start learning how to do that,
then you get the operating manual to the black box,
you know?
Absolutely.
The three pounds of tofu right between the ears
where it's all going on.
Whatever is other than the transcendental,
that's a whole other matter.
But whatever's not transcendental
it's produced inside the nervous system
in terms of conscious experience,
or unconscious experiences.
Absolutely.
Let's talk about your definition of the difference between
the mind and the brain,
and how the two are actually inextricably intertwined.
Right, it's a fairly, I would say, conventional notion.
It's not radical.
It's the idea that the brain is embedded
in the nervous system.
So when I talk about the brain,
I'm really talking about the nervous system,
which is embedded in the body,
intertwining with all these other systems,
the immune system, the reproductive systems,
all those systems.
And then it's embedded in nature altogether,
and in culture, across time.
So in that broad, interdependent, interconnected view,
which is very consistent with modern science
both in terms of quantum physics, and deep ecology,
as well as the post-modern view of culture.
Inside all of that, this system,
now I'll just talk about the brain,
moves information around.
In other words, it sends signals.
So the brain moves information around
like your heart moves blood around.
And each little bit of information
conveys meaning in some way.
Now most of those meanings are at a very, very basic level,
like tracking the amount of blood flow
in the lower intestine, or something like that.
But layered up, increasingly higher and higher up,
which also maps to how the brain evolved
over evolutionary time, you know, 600 million years,
roughly, of the evolution of the nervous system.
At the higher levels, the brain is moving
so much information around
at such a sophisticated and integrated way,
that we can actually have a sense
of understanding each other right here and now.
The net of it is that the mind, as I define it,
is the flow of information through the nervous system.
Most of that information is forever unconscious,
but the two are intertwined, mind and brain,
in that as the brain changes, the mind changes.
Yeah, let's talk about that,
how the mind also changes the brain.
Right, well, for example, just as information flows
through the nervous system,
'cause that's what the mind is,
what that does is literally change the brain
in a variety of ways.
For example, parts of the brain that are more active
have more blood flow.
Synapses that fire, or neurons that fire frequently
become more sensitive to simulation.
There's a famous saying in neurology,
"Neurons that fire together wire together."
It's pretty mechanical at a basic level.
In other words, the more neurons that are firing,
and the longer they're firing,
and the more intensively they're firing,
the better they get in terms of wiring together.
Lots of really fun studies show this sort of thing.
One of my favorite are taxi cab drivers in London.
Yes.
They have to memorize the twisty, turny streets there.
They're hippocampus, a part of the brain
that's involved in visual-spacial memory, is thicker.
Literally, measurably thicker at the end of their training
than it was at the beginning of their training,
because all that mental activity of memorizing streets,
has actually forged new neural structures.
Now, a lot of us are not gonna drive a cab in London,
so bringing it more to home,
interesting studies of long-term meditators.
For example, it looks very clear that two parts
of the brain in particular get measurably thicker,
and strengthened, as it were, by frequent use.
One part is called the insula,
that's a part of the brain that tracks
the internal state of the body,
which kind of makes sense if you're following your breath,
you're doing some kind of contemplative practice,
you're gonna build out that part of your brain.
The insula, though, also, really importantly, does empathy.
It is a huge component of empathy,
which is the simulation or tracking,
or resonance with, the emotions of other people.
We have these three, more or less, systems in the brain
that track either the actions of other people,
or the emotions of other people,
or the thought processes of other people,
all are really important,
but obviously empathy is really central.
So the way the insula works is that
if I'm having emotion, particularly a primary emotion,
like sadness, or fear, or happiness,
a lot of neurons light up there.
When I watch you, let's say, having a similar emotion,
some fraction of those same neurons light up
in my insula as well.
So I literally feel something from the inside out--
Highly relational.
Of what it might be like to be you.
Yeah.
So if by paying attention to your internal experience,
which is a seemingly ephemeral, immaterial,
mental activity, actually changes neural structure,
that helps me be more in touch with myself
as well as more in touch with you.
So interestingly when, say, for example,
you're taking a group of people,
say a group of practicing Tibetan Buddhists,
who are accustomed to meditating
and spending time in meditation,
that empathy that might be shown, say,
en masse through that group then
isn't necessarily one of a moral decision.
This has actually become hardwired
as the stimulus to the insula, right?
Or the development of the insula occurs?
Yes, we have these capabilities as human beings
to be deeply empathic.
Yes.
There is a normal variation in terms of how
capable a person is, and then, of course,
there's a question of how they develop it.
Then there are other complexities,
because people who can be deeply empathic with us
can also be viciously exploitive and dehumanizing to them.
You see it all over the world.
Right, so it's a hard wiring thing,
it's not necessarily a moral issue.
At that level, whether one uses those empathic capacities
to transcend the us, them distinction,
which is big, a couple chapters in my book are about that,
because I think that's a critical issue in the world today.
We've got caveman brains in the 21st century
armed with nuclear weapons.
Yes.
You know, we really need to work on this
us, them dichotomy,
because as soon as you mark that distinction
between us and them,
you immediately start activating fearful aggression.
It starts warming up those circuits.
They don't necessarily take action yet,
but they're getting primed.
And then as soon as you start to feel threatened via them,
the wolf of hate gets up and starts snarling and biting.
Yes.
So the point here is that there is
an intertwining necessity to have both the capacity
to resonate with other people,
as well as the moral intention.
Which is, that's the desirable combination.
But it's interesting what you just mentioned
about the empathy.
For example, excuse me. (coughing)
Go ahead, anyone else need to cough? (laughing)
It's our little cough break.
Okay, so what you were just speaking about,
might this be an example of it?
If you have someone who is an empath
and understands what motivates the feelings
of themselves and others,
say to skew that and use it in a very highly manipulative,
say marketing campaign,
that might not be for the highest and best good,
that would be, as you say, nuclear weapons in the brain.
Exactly right, exactly right.
There's no, it's interesting,
the book's titled Buddha's Brain.
In some ways it's an investigation of Buddhism
in terms of evolutionary neuropsychology.
In other words, grounding this ancient tradition of wisdom
that began 2,500 years ago in terms of
what modern science has to say,
which, very interestingly, does not disagree
with Buddhist psychology in any fundamental particular.
Right.
Buddhist cosmology is sort of outside the frame
of western science, western science can't say either way,
they're just outside their frame.
But in terms of how the mind actually works,
and what leads to suffering,
or what leads to freedom from suffering,
modern science, modern neuropsychology,
and Buddhist contemplative psychology
just fit together like hand and glove.
So in that psychology it's interesting that
there are these three pillars of practice in Buddhism:
Virtue, mindfulness, and wisdom.
Mindfulness is sometimes translated to concentration,
being able to study and absorb the mind.
It's very interesting that there's no replacement
for one of those three pillars of practice.
It's a three-legged stool.
You can't have just mindfulness and wisdom,
you also need virtue.
You also need a moral intelligence
of valuing, of being principled, and being restrained.
And it's interesting that those three functions correspond
to, very closely, actually, to three fundamental functions
of the nervous system, right?
To regulate, that sounds like virtue.
To learn, that sounds like where we place our attention
in terms of mindfulness.
And to select, which sounds like wisdom,
which boils down to, essentially, giving up lesser rewards
for greater ones.
Right, and not necessarily immediate rewards.
Right, exactly right.
Where that's a different portion of the brain.
Yeah, seeing of the big picture.
Yes. (laughing)
Exactly right.
But it's so marvelous
It is!
to see that these voices speaking to us
from the dusty plains of northern India 2,500 years ago,
and along the way people in all cultures around the world
actually are resonant with, and consistent with,
and confirmed by the most sophisticated discoveries
of the last few years of modern science.
And one place you take it
that I find very interesting is that you're saying,
and this again has to be from your exploration
in all of these disciplines,
including Buddhism and meditation,
is that, you're saying that our innate nature,
if we can quiet these systems and put them in balance,
that the innate nature of humanity is goodness and love.
Absolutely true.
I talk about it as the five C's.
I think through evolution, and just simply thinking
in terms purely of the body and psychology,
without resorting to anything religious, if you will,
that humans are conscious,
it's really hard to make a brain unconscious.
You have to hit it hard, you have to knock it out,
even when we're sleeping there's a lot
of conscious activity going on.
As you know, if you're suddenly awakened, you know,
you can recall the last few seconds, at least,
of conscious activity.
Second, we're calm, the resting state, our home base,
is activation of what's called
the parasympathetic nervous system.
In other words, when we're not angry,
or upset, or hungry, or in pain,
or chemically disturbed, there's a calm.
Third, we're contented.
The basic resting state people default to
is mild sense of contentment.
You know, which mild being a very wonderful sense,
of kind of ease of mind.
Fourth, we're caring.
We evolved to be very caring.
Arguably, the development of caringness,
and the skills that enable it,
are what drove the evolution of the brain
over the last hundred million years,
literally in three steps, I can talk about that in a moment,
but three steps in terms of vertebrate evolution,
then primates, then humans, so caring.
And then last, we're creative, we're very generative.
There's a generativity in the nervous system.
That's our home base, that is our home base.
But the problem is--
Yeah, I was gonna say,
my next question is
To evolve,
we are able to be driven from home
at the snap of a twig, or the cough of a leopard nearby.
And we tend to, now, in this time,
for a variety of reasons, many people are stuck
in this sympathetic nervous system overdrive.
Right.
And so we can't recognize a lot of those
native, or inherent, traits, day in and day out
that you just spoke about.
Let's talk about how that happens.
Let's talk about the nervous system a little bit,
how we get stuck in that overdrive,
and basically suppress the parasympathetic nervous system,
and what the implications of that are.
We evolved to handle bursts of stress,
and there's a place for them.
And we evolved to handle bursts of excitement,
there's a place for those too.
We did not evolve to have chronic, medium-grade stress,
which is the lot of most people in the modern world.
The result of that, as you well know,
is, basically is toxic to both the body and the mind.
In other words, chronic stress wears on the immune system,
the gastrointestinal system, the cardiovascular system,
it's depressing, and so forth.
Part of the problem, though,
is that the sympathetic nervous system evolved
to go into gear immediately, because that's what we need
to run away from that leopard, you know, in the bushes.
Or to chase after that opportunity that we suddenly see,
some prey we can go eat,
and bring home to our family, if you will.
On the other hand, the sympathetic nervous system
wears off really, really slowly, because what it does is,
it intertwines with the endocrine system, the hormones,
which lead to stress hormone releases,
like adrenaline and cortisol.
They take a long time to metabolize.
Have you ever had the experience where you thought
something awful was going to happen, or had happened,
and then you discovered that it was really all fine?
And yet your body's still rattled three, four hours later?
That's the result of, you know, the residues
of the sympathetic release is still in the blood stream.
So the net of it is that we are in a state
of chronic sympathetic overload.
And also this is a culture that's addicted on stimulation.
Yes.
It's kind of an ADD culture.
It's kind of funny, my kids will watch a movie
that was made in the '70's or the '80's,
not that long ago.
Boring!
Exactly! It's too slow!
Too slow.
Where as my dad, who's very sharp,
retired college professor, 91, still really sharp,
he can't watch a modern movie 'cause it's just too fast.
There are cuts every two to three seconds.
But that's what we get habituated to.
I think of it as a kind of trance, you know?
I think that we're in a paranoid trance these days.
We're very threat sensitive as humans
at the top of the food chain.
Our ancestors that were all mellow, and trusted everyone,
(scratching) they got the chop.
But our ancestors that were nervous, and cranky,
anxious and cranky, they passed on a lot of gene copies,
and we're walking around as those gene copies today.
So understanding how we're hardwired to be paranoid
in the first place,
and then we live in a world where, with modern media,
and being also in sympathetic overdrive,
and then manipulated by governmental forces
that jack up the threat profile to then have
a willing and subordinate populous.
That results in, of course, a lot of ongoing,
low-grade fear, fear of the future, fear of the world,
fear of threat level orange any time you go to an airport,
even though the threat on that day at that airport
is probably bright green, actually.
That leads us also to treat other people badly,
'cause as soon as we feel threatened,
we're very ready to get very reactive.
So for me the corrective is to understand it.
I mean, the book I wrote is mostly practical tools,
because that's what I'm really interested in.
I'm a methods guy, I synthesize things,
and I apply them--
And the thing is, it's very approachable
for anybody.
Oh, thank you.
You've written it in a way that,
it's very easy to digest and take on
if you wish to go this direction, yes?
Yeah, I think if you get something clearly
you can explain it clearly.
Yes.
And so if you're not explaining it clearly,
there's a decent chance you don't get it clearly.
So I try to get it clearly
and then I can explain it clearly.
But the take away point is that if we're in
this paranoid trance much of the time,
it's really useful to put in correction factors.
To calm the body down with various practices
that activate the parasympathetic nervous system
and settle us down.
To tap into feelings of being strong,
which help you feel safer.
To realize that you are safe, do the cognitive work.
And then especially to connect with other people
in this empathic and resonant way.
All of those things lower the paranoia,
wake us up from this nightmare
of being threatened all the time,
and then help us take much better care of ourselves
and other people.
And these are practices,
and you lay each one of these out in the book,
I think, again, in a very simple to understand way.
But, let's go back just a moment,
before we start talking about some of these exercises
we can work with, and back to what I was saying
in the very beginning where my son's girlfriend, Stephanie,
is saying, "I know, I just need to snap out of it."
Let's talk about why that is easier said than done.
Why is it we can't just make our mind up?
"I am not going to behave that way anymore, that's it."
But then we disappoint ourselves
maybe minutes or hours later.
Well a couple things on that, it's interesting,
I've been a therapist for a really long time,
and it's had two big effects.
One is that it's made me a lot more compassionate,
to really appreciate the forces that are bearing down
on people and at work in their lives.
I think about the quote, unquote, "10,000 causes upstream."
And that's, by the way, a really useful way
to deal with a difficult person,
to just kind of be aware,
or think about some of the 10,000 causes
that are leading them to bump into you
right here and right now.
Right.
The other thing it's made me
is much more tough-minded.
You know, the joke about how many therapists
it takes to change a light bulb?
I don't think I've heard that one.
Only one.
Only one? (laughing)
But the light bulb has to want to change.
There you go.
That's good.
It's lame, but profound.
It can't be stuck.
And so I see a lot of people
who don't snap out of it 'cause deep down
they don't want to snap out of it, first off.
So number one--
Is that because they're physically,
neurologically, addicted to that pattern?
It could be, it could also be that it's rewarding
for them or honestly,
the deep level.
In a negative way.
They could be afraid of what will come their way
if they do snap out of it.
There are a lot of reasons, and many of them are completely
below the water line.
But I think one part is to definitely, you know,
think about what is your true intention.
Now, more to your question though,
what are the tendencies that keep drawing us
in a certain direction?
You're absolutely right, I mean, they're very embedded
in the nervous system.
Learning has occurred.
People get upset as a way to cope,
so if they're not, if they let go of that way of coping,
they better replace it with another way of coping.
I find, for myself, I do this kind of little,
mini first-aid thing, which is actually not in the book,
so this is a special super-duper tip.
Pause, before you do anything, pause.
How often do we make mistakes by not saying something
versus how often do we make mistakes by saying something
and regretting it later?
Very true.
Okay, second, have compassion for your suffering.
Like right then and there, your son's girlfriend,
to start with self-compassion.
There's a lot of research these days
about the power of self-compassion,
which is something I include in the book,
and how to activate it in neurologically clever ways,
because a lot of people have a hard time
being compassionate for themselves.
One of the tricks is to bring to mind
the felt sense of being with someone
who really cares about you.
It could be a pet,
it could be someone who's no longer alive,
it could be a spirit, whatever it is,
it could be your mate these days.
To bring that to mind really can
take you to self-compassion.
The third thing is to get on your own side.
That again is something where I've gotten more tough-minded.
I see a lot of people who are not on their own side,
and if you're not gonna be on your own side,
who's gonna be on your side?
Again, all these messages that your--
The Rabbi hello quote.
You're flawed, you're a flawed human being.
This is, again, the manipulation that's occurring
from the outside perpetually.
I know.
From all systems, you're flawed,
you're not enough.
That's right.
But if you get on your own side,
you start recognizing those,
and you start having the capacity to separate
and distance from, that's where mindfulness
is really, really useful.
To separate from those thoughts.
Then increasingly you look at them literally
as almost invaders, or afflictions, upon yourself,
that it's not good for me to have the thought that
I am not allowed to snap out of it, right?
And because, but if I'm not on my own side,
which usually needs a foundation of compassion and pausing,
if I'm not on my own side it won't mean anything to me,
it won't matter to me, that I'm now recognizing that
that thought is bad for me.
So I've got to be on my own side.
And then, make a plan, take action.
Yet there is another factor embedded
within all of this that you write about,
which is very simple to grasp, and that is,
basically bad news sticks like Teflon,
the negative sticks like Teflon to the brain.
And the positive slides, I mean, like Velcro,
negative and Velcro,
There you go.
and then the good news
kind of slips off like Teflon.
What is it in us that makes that the natural hierarchy
that we more quickly attune to the negative
than the positive?
Right.
One of the most interesting part of the book
for me to write was why do we suffer?
So, if you think about it, it's a pretty important question,
why do we actually suffer?
And how is it that we evolved to suffer, in effect?
And one of the considerations there is to realize
that we have these three fundamental systems, basically,
in the brain that direct us.
One is to approach the pleasant.
The second one is to avoid the unpleasant.
And the third one is to affiliate, or attach, to loved ones.
Crocodiles, snakes, and sharks have the first two systems.
Only birds, and mammals, and especially primates,
and especially humans, have that third system,
which is about attachment.
In terms of the first two, though,
if we just think about it,
and they get used in the service of attachment,
you know, we want to approach carrots
and dodge sticks, right?
Both are important.
The thing, though, is in evolution,
if you miss a carrot today,
you'll probably have a chance at a carrot tomorrow.
Fail to dodge that stick today, whap!
You know, no chance at a carrot tomorrow.
So we have evolved what's called in science
a negativity bias.
The brain is biased toward looking for negative information,
reacting to it, storing it, and then retrieving it
at the drop of a hat, you know, or the crack of a twig.
Therefore it is, as you said quoting me,
it's like Velcro for negative experiences,
but Teflon for positive ones.
We can remember positive experiences,
and when I say remember, key point here,
it's not so much the explicit, what's called explicit memory
for a specific recollections of events,
but rather the lived residue,
the slow sifting down into us of the residue
of experience in implicit memory.
That's where the action really is,
particularly in terms of mood, resilience,
optimism, confidence, happiness, sense of ourselves,
you know, learned reactions to the world,
that's what we really care about.
That's all implicit memory.
Well, as we go through life, you know,
99 good things happen, they go right through the sieve.
One bad thing happens (clicking) it's caught and tracked.
And what you then have is a gradual tilting over time
toward the negative in implicit memory.
The way to remedy that, number one,
is to appreciate the power of it,
and to realize, in a sense, you know,
I sleep with the enemy every night
between my ears.
Yeah.
We're hardwired, we're hardwired toward it.
Yeah, we're hardwired to do it,
that's where compassion comes in,
that's one of those 10,000 causes upstream and all the rest.
But then, take up arms against it,
take up arms against our oppressors.
In other words, be on our own side,
be a hammer, not a nail,
that's a critically important thing for people in life,
and that's, for me, one of the really great things
about this book, the idea that you can be, at cause,
you can be a cue ball instead of an eight ball
inside your own head, literally over time.
Anyway, if you're on your own side,
go, to remedy this tilt, actively, whoop,
look for positive experiences,
which'll just level the playing field.
So, three, four, five times a day,
sense something positive, look for a positive fact,
let it become a positive experience,
then take 20 to 30 seconds with it
so you really take time for those neurons to fire together,
so they start really, really wiring together,
and then let it fill your whole body.
Let it be as intense as possible,
it could be very private and secret,
you're having a wonderful moment
in the middle of this business meeting,
or driving, or talking with some person,
and then sense and intend that it's really sinking into you,
that it's slowly getting woven in to the fabric
of the brain and the self.
I love that part of your book, by the way.
Thank you.
That was really lovely,
because how often do we actually take time?
Normally something pleasant or nice happens,
and we say, "Oh, that was nice,
"now let me see what I have to do next."
Exactly right.
We blow right by it,
and we don't ever tend to hard wire those events
into our emotional, mental structures.
Yeah, we're not on our own side.
Right in that little moment, if we were on our own side,
we'd say, "Whew, this feels good.
"It's not a million dollar moment, but it feels good.
"Why don't I hang out with it for more than three seconds?"
Yeah, but if you have a whole lot of $5,
or $10, or $20 moments,
that is going to overall shift the balance
within your reaction to life, isn't it?
Absolutely, I'm gonna borrow that line,
that's a great line, thank you very much.
(laughing)
A lot of $5, and $10, and $20 moments.
Exactly right.
Yeah.
And you literally, if you do this, you know,
a half a dozen times a day,
within a few weeks you'll feel different.
Within a few years you'll be really different.
It's also a great way to heal major things
that were missing when you grew up.
Or, you know, very painful experiences that you've had.
The sense that this current, positive experience
is sinking down into, balming and soothing those old places
that are hurt and abraded and bruised and wounded,
or where there was a deficit,
they didn't get enough of what they needed,
so that over time you gradually
fill that hole in your heart.
And that is a fundamental way to transform yourself
that's grounded in neuroscience.
And you can experience, in daily life, and you've earned it,
'cause you've earned those good experiences, you know?
You set the table, you put the food on the plate,
bring a big spoon.
Yes, there you go.
Now, what about the opposite?
What if you walk into a situation that is aggressive?
Now, we don't have the leopard on our tail,
but say it's a business meeting.
Sure.
And you walk in,
and there's an air of aggression,
and people are at odds with each other,
how do you manage your energy
so you don't keep reinforcing those fear circuits
in the midst of that environment?
Right, that's a great question.
And let's be clear, you know the two mistakes
people can make in life.
One is they think there's no tiger,
but there really is one.
In other words, for example,
they miss that it's an aggressive and tough situation
they're walking into, or the deck is stacked against them,
or people really don't have their best interest at heart.
Or they're gonna pull out a gun momentarily.
You know, there are real tigers in the world.
Right.
We gotta really deal with those real tigers.
Then there's the other mistake, though,
where you think there's a tiger there,
and you act accordingly, but there really was no tiger.
Or it was a paper tiger, or a painted tiger,
or a chained tiger, or a stuffed tiger,
or a baby tiger, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.
So that's the mistake we usually make.
Now that's said, let's say there's a real tiger here.
There's a real tough situation you're dealing with.
One, recognize how that reactivates you, you know?
It's literally like we're so, most of the aggression
that we experienced in evolution was social aggression.
In other words, we evolved on these bands
that were very hierarchical, dominance hierarchies,
and a lot of the aggression was internal
or with other bands.
It's interesting that it's estimated that roughly
one man in 100 died in the 20th century due to war, alright?
And that's considered an incredibly lethal century.
The best estimates of hunter, gatherer cultures and groups,
which are what humans evolved in,
is that roughly one in eight men died.
In other words, 15%, 15 times more men died--
A violent death, yeah.
A violent death because there's a lot of aggression there.
So appreciate how it is reactivating.
Second, get on your own side.
Third, access a felt sense of strength.
You know, that's so important
to tap into muscle memory, literally.
I'll do a little thing where I'll sit up
a little straighter.
Or I'll squint my eyes a little,
or I'll call up a memory of rock climbing,
I've done a lot of rock climbing
and a lot of wilderness activities.
Or I'll call up a memory of really being for my kids
in some, you know, messy situation in grade school.
That will then draw up, literally, that implicit memory.
It'll light up the circuits of implicit memory
that'll help me feel stronger.
Another is to look over at that other person
and see their suffering.
That is a paradoxically powerful way to feel more powerful,
in a sense, over here,
to see the ways that they're suffering over there.
Doesn't mean you're waiving your rights,
doesn't mean you agree with them.
It doesn't mean you don't think they should be locked up
for a long time, or whatever, right?
Yes. (laughing)
But you're not so reactived when you see their suffering.
And then you can act more skillfully.
That thing you just said,
it also struck me in your book,
and I thought that was really good,
because it has to do with our reactive side,
our defensive side, and so forth,
and that is to take a breath, don't say anything,
manage your energies, make a commitment to the things
you were just talking about to bring a sense of strength in,
of balance in, and recognize on,
'cause this bumps up against ego
that you're not waiving your rights because you choose
to be empathetic in that moment.
A lot of people feel, as I think you're implying there,
that if we're to show our empathy,
we're going to be now, we've waived our right,
we're going to be taken advantage of.
That's right.
Not true?
Not true at all.
It's funny, that's why I wrote actually a chapter
on compassion and assertiveness,
and the idea of putting them together, to me,
is really interesting.
And of course, that's the bread and butter
of a therapist, especially
Let's talk about
a couple's counselor
that because
you dealt with a lot of this
within the hierarchy of your meditation group, right?
The foundation you were working with, I think it is.
Oh, I see.
And you were using that as an example
in the book at board meetings, and so forth,
how people communicated in this both empathetic
and also assertive way.
Can you give us an example of what that looks like
in its ideal form.
Right, well in that situation I was commenting on
being on the board of a very large meditation center
for many years, and observing the teachers there.
Particularly when I was a newbie just trying to suss out
what's up, what's going on here.
And I would see them be very calm, very at ease,
very peaceful, very tracking, very present,
not as a fake, not like that New Age stare, you know,
this is what these people do,
it's the real deal.
Yes.
On the other hand, when it came time to speak,
clunk, they said what needed to be said.
It was like a stone dropping into a pond, kathunk.
And then they let it go.
They just said it and they moved on.
And that was a great model for me of this culmination
that had great power behind it,
because I have a business background.
I've done a lot of tough, business type situations,
and to watch people not posture, not bluster,
not throw their chest out,
but actually communicate with great dignity and presence,
that actually had more impact than a lot of chest thumping.
That was the thing that I saw there.
With people in general, it's interesting that
to be compassionate, truly, with other people,
and not feel like a doormat,
or that they're just gonna overrun you,
or you're gonna get used up, and depleted,
and wrung out, and, you know,
my dad had grown up on a ranch in North Dakota.
Before he became a zoologist he had a phrase,
"Rid hard and put up wet."
You know what I mean? (laughing)
Yes, I know, I heard it was rode hard
and put up wet, but yeah, there you go.
There you go, that's right.
(both laughing)
So the point is, to not feel like we've been
ridden hard and put up wet,
we've got to be able to stand up for ourselves.
But you know, it's the old line,
fences make for good neighbors.
In other words, if we hold boundaries,
and take care of our own interests,
then we're much more able to
be compassionate with other people.
On the other hand, if we're compassionate for other people,
we avoid needless contentiousness,
and we don't have to exhaust ourselves
tilting at windmills and fighting all kinds of battles
that we don't really need to fight.
So in that sense, the other side is true,
the compassion, and related capacities like empathy,
and kindness, and goodwill for the other people
that, you know, where you're happy that they're happy.
All those capacities support, you know,
being assertive in appropriate ways.
And let's take the fake it
'til you make it stance.
If you don't quite have the disciplines down yet
there are things you can do, even by way of body languaging,
body position, facial expression, and so forth,
that can trigger chemicals to essentially guide you
into those feelings,
from what I was picking up in your book.
Oh, yeah, more than anything I'm interested in
what can real people do in real life, you know,
three minutes a day.
Yeah.
You know, in the real stuff, especially when,
it's easy to be calm and mellow, right,
when you're sitting on a beach with a drink
that's got an umbrella sticking out of it.
But to be present, and take care of business,
in a business situation, or raising a family,
I've written a lot about raising families,
I know that world very well.
Or in a tricky conversation with a loved one,
or you're dealing with an aging parent,
you're trying to grapple with what to do there,
and so forth.
To be able to draw on certain skills.
You know, the brain is the ultimate tool,
and what I wanted to offer was, basically,
a toolbox of tools for the ultimate tool, right?
And that's what we really have there.
Now, in relationships, to do what you're getting at there,
there are a number of things to do.
For one, frankly, is to just relax the body,
because when the body's relaxed it's hard to feel anxious.
You know, when we're not feeling anxious,
we're gonna open to the other person
and get so much more information.
Even on a sales call, not being afraid of your prospects,
or your customers, but relaxing,
so that you can be present with them,
so you can see what they really need to close the deal.
It's like take a breath first, right?
Yeah, exhale especially, exhaling activates
the parasympathetic wing of the nervous system, technically.
Long exhalation.
Yeah, focus on the exhalation.
The inhalation activates the parasympathetic,
that's why the heart speeds up a little bit when we inhale,
and slows down a little bit when we exhale.
Sympathetic inhale, and parasympathetic exhale.
Yeah, that's right.
So really focus on exhaling.
Another little trick with people to feel safer,
touch your lips, do it unobtrusively.
People do do that a lot, unconsciously,
in meetings and such.
What is this doing, these little spots along here?
Sometimes they do it because it's body language,
they're muzzling themselves,
or holding back something they want to say.
But doing this is quite soothing, actually,
because a lot of parasympathetic nerve endings innervate,
they flow into the lips.
Because the parasympathetic nervous system
is the so-called rest and digest wing
of the nervous system.
Yes.
So there's a lot of digesting that begins,
you know, at the lips as well.
Okay, so touching the lips,
I see people do this in meetings.
This is something that isn't just a nervous tic,
there's actually, perhaps, a reason behind this.
Well sometimes they're doing it because it's body language
that they're trying to muzzle themselves,
or hold something back,
but it's also a wonderful way to soothe yourself.
For example, people who work with horses
that are really upset will often touch them
around the mouth.
Or if you're working with young children,
it's very soothing.
Or, I'll admit it on video here,
that sometimes to go to sleep,
I'll put a knuckle next to my lip.
I don't such my thumb,
but I'll just put a little knuckle there,
and that'll be soothing,
as well as bringing up lots of associations.
But we're talking also about how to activate
that quality of compassion for other people.
Another powerful one is to look people in the eyes.
Most parts of the brain do many, many things,
but there are a few parts of the brain
that pretty much just do one very narrow function.
We evolved that part of the brain
to do that narrow functioning,
'cause that narrow function was incredibly important.
There's a part of the brain called the fusiform gyrus
that just tracks facial expressions.
Ah, to see whether they're safe or accepted--
Yeah, 'cause they're so informative.
So much information is conveyed by the face,
especially around the muscles around the eyes and the mouth.
So if you want to tune in to another person,
and also, potentially, activate more kindness for them,
look at their eyes.
Another thing I do, I track the being behind the eyes.
In other words, I have a sense that I'm with someone
behind the eyes, and I just sense their suffering.
It's not like I'm patronizing them, or feeling superior,
because I know I'm suffering over here,
but I just track the small ways,
I mean, not gross horrible suffering,
I mean the subtle forms of suffering
that really matter to us.
Like feeling strained, or stressed,
or a little worried about something,
or threatened, or grappling with aging,
et cetera, et cetera.
That alone tends to, you know, activate kindness.
Then the last thing, one real fast note,
I recognize that it's my self-interest.
It's in my self-interest to be kind to other people.
It's enlightened self-interest
to not take things so personally,
not worry so much about me,
be really focused on how to be useful to them,
how to be helpful to them.
That, you know, pardoxical sense is my best strategy
of self-interest,
to not worry so much about my self interest.
Yeah, absolutely, no, I understand that.
Now, you said something a moment ago
that this was a bit of an aside,
so just skip right over and say,
"I don't know, we don't need to talk about that."
But this whole notion of reading faces,
one of the things I've read that comes up often
with people who are autistic, or labeled as autistic,
is there's an inability to be able to have that function.
That's correct, they're just really poor
at picking up social cues, including the subtle information
that's conveyed in ways that a typical person
is very comfortable with receiving,
that's conveyed through facial expression.
So that portion of the brain is simply
not firing properly?
Correct, or it's flooded by other things.
I mean, one of the things with--
Overwhelmed, yeah.
That happens with people on the autistic spectrum
is there's, very often they're just flooded
with stimulation.
Yeah.
So then it's hard to track something like the brain
because it's like a signal lost in a sea of noise.
Right, and it's--
Track the face is what I meant to say.
Yeah, it's because it's a relatively subtle
set of signals compared to what else
they might be perceiving at that time.
That was just an aside, another thing--
Or their face is so intense.
In other words, the eyes are so intense,
it's just, it's like they need to put on sunglasses,
in effect, because the lights are so bright.
Oh, interesting.
Very often, in couples, typically it's the man
about which this could be said, not necessarily,
but basically she's wanting more emotional contact
and presence, she's wanting more supplies
coming across the table here,
and she sees him as sort of inert, and kind of cold,
and not that caring.
The truth is, he cares so much about her,
that any little thing that happens
just kind of floods him,
so he distances to preserve some capacity to stay connected.
Interesting.
It's a very interesting way--
That's very much misunderstood.
Yeah, totally, and it's a nice way to understand it,
if it's true, obviously, and he's not just a brick
and hating on her.
Right, right.
Whatever, you know, but you gotta track
which tiger is it,
But you should know
the real one or the fake one.
at some point
whether you're married to a brick or not.
That's right, that's right.
Yeah, right.
Very often it's because he's flooded,
so if he can then, paradoxically,
you know, fences make for good neighbors.
They have more capacity to stay centered in himself,
then he's more able to be present
and leaning forward for her.
Very interesting.
But I did hear too, by the way,
is a good thing in relationships is to lean forward.
'Cause that immediately starts activating
all kinds of signals internally.
I'm here, I'm not nonchalant,
I'm not disconnected.
Yeah, not just
the message it sends, but internally in here,
it just moves us into that social mode.
Nurturing.
Good stuff.
That's kind of a natural place
to go to from there,
and there was something I thought was kind of cute.
You were writing about science is showing
that the nurturer is actually the one
that is receiving more stress release, believe it or not,
than the person being nurtured.
You say you tried to pull that on your wife
as to why it's so good she should give you
more back scratches?
That's right.
(Regina laughing)
Aw, you really read my book carefully.
Oh yeah.
That's great.
I read your book, uh-huh.
And she's not buying it, but nonetheless,
let's talk about that, right?
(laughing) Well that was a riff off of studies
that show that, you know, related to what I said earlier
how, you know, love, broadly defined,
has really driven, more than any other force,
any other factor, love has driven the evolution of the brain
over the last hundred million years.
One of the main bursts of that has been in primate groups,
and than human evolution.
Just to kind of mark it in time, the oldest stone tools
are about 2.5, 2.7 million years old.
Those folks had brains 1/3 of our size, but,
the brain has tripled, in other words,
over the last three million years.
But they could make stone tools.
I can't make a stone tool.
It's not easy to make a stone tool,
but they were smart enough to make a stone tool.
You probably wouldn't know how
to track the animal, either.
No, I'd be really hungry, really bad.
Yeah.
You know, nobody wants therapy on the Serengeti,
so I'd be out of luck.
Right.
And you wouldn't know which herbs to choose.
You might poison yourself.
No, I'd just, no.
Probably wouldn't be around very long.
I'm in trouble, big trouble.
No, so, let's see, as we evolved, you know,
in this last three million years,
the 2/3 of the brain, basically, that's been added
is largely devoted to social, emotional capabilities.
Language processing, emotional signals, empathy skills,
cooperative planning abilities,
being able to foresee the future,
reflect on the past in a social frame.
That's been driven by the reproductive benefits,
as it's called, that's the real engine of evolution.
That increase of the brain has been driven, in large part,
because the functions that it serves
were so critical to survival.
What are the functions that those new layers, and levels,
and parts of the brain do?
What are their functions?
They're social, emotional functions.
So in that context, I reported in the book,
on a study that was done in primates
where they observed how much time they spent
grooming each other.
A typical primate band, very often,
will spend about 1/6th of its waking hours
scratching other people, looking for bugs, I mean,
that's a protein source.
Yeah, like 18%
of their day nit-picking.
Nit-picking, you know.
That's not how we mean nit-picking.
Humans have, yeah.
Yeah.
Real little bugs.
Picking bugs off of each other.
Real little nits, real little nits.
Yeah, and other things, scratching each other and stuff.
The interesting thing is that, in one study,
they actually anesthetized, I think it's Macaque monkeys,
or some primate species.
They anesthetized them afterward,
and then tracked levels of stress hormones
in the bodies of the people
who are getting groomed, the groomees,
versus the people who are doing the grooming, the groomers.
And they found that the groomees actually had
more stress hormones than the groomers.
In other words, the groomers were getting
a stress-relief benefit from doing all the back scratching
and nit-picking, and bug eating.
I was thinking about that
as I was reading your book,
that really makes sense,
because if you're the one that is putting that energy out,
and oftentimes maybe giving someone a foot rub,
or what not, there is a kind of grace and rhythmic element
to doing something like that.
You're taking yourself into that,
more of a parasympathetic relaxed frame of mind.
Yes.
A nervous system response.
Yeah, exactly, it's calming and soothing.
Interestingly, it's also emotionally very rewarding.
Like another study, I believe I mentioned,
tracked people who, in an experiment,
were given some amount of money, fairly modest,
but like $10 or $20,
and then they can keep it for themselves,
or they could give it to charity.
And they were in the scanner when they made the decision,
give it to charity or keep it for themselves,
and they got much more activation
in the reward centers of the brain
when they gave it to charity.
Mm-hmm.
Isn't that interesting?
It is interesting, but it also shows us
that we are innately good,
and that we have come a long way already
in our evolution.
Totally true.
I mean, we beat ourselves up for the negativity,
the kind of, you know, the cons we try to put over
on each other, you know, throughout humanity
via whether it's politics, even religion, education,
but when you scratch it all away,
you just talked about that little experiment
really says it, doesn't it?
It totally does, I mean, you just see it
all over the place that human beings,
it's sort of like dark clouds, storm clouds in the sky.
If there are storm clouds in the sky
that's what our eye goes to, right?
That becomes the figure, and the sky is the ground.
In the same way, you know, most of the sky
of human relationships is cooperative, caring,
altruistic cooperation.
We notice the drums of war, right?
Because we evolved to pay a lot of attention to anger,
because it's a really important social signal, and threat.
But really, we are losing sight of this vast sky
of exactly what you've said, of fundamental human nature,
and fundamentally how people operate,
and fundamentally the forces that have driven us,
you know, gotten us to this point.
People often underestimate how harsh,
just like you were teasing me
about not being able to find food.
You're right, those are harsh environments,
and the bands that had the best teamwork
out competed the other bands for scarce resources.
And they're the ones who passed on their genes.
And we're the inheritors of this incredible gift to us.
That's one thing that I often think about, gratitude.
How we, on the day we were conceived,
we were given this extraordinary instruction set
for building this amazing three pounds
right between the ears,
which is the most complex object known to science,
with all these amazing capabilities.
That was just handed to us,
including all of our tendencies toward cooperation,
toward contentment, toward, you know, calm,
creativity, all those five C's.
Consciousness, and all the rest of that.
Fantastic!
Really, I mean,
it's amazing, we know--
It just makes me happy to think about it,
and then it makes me want to be responsible
for using it well.
Yes.
And help other people do the same thing.
Well let's, before we wrap up this conversation,
let's talk about one more area,
and you just brought this up,
and that's the notion of expanding the category
or notion of us.
Yeah.
Well, in the world right now,
we really, really need this.
In other words, when we were evolving,
us was my band of 5,200 people like me,
and everybody else was a them, pretty much.
Yet, now we're in a world where we're so interdependent.
Whereas I was listening to the radio earlier,
carbon released into the atmosphere
knows no national boundaries.
In other words, the whole planet is heating,
potentially catastrophically.
Most people really, truly do not understand
how close to the edge of catastrophic
runaway dynamics this planet really is.
Scientists understand it,
and they're talking about it all the time,
but many other people don't really understand that.
We really need, if we're gonna survive,
we're gonna survive, but if we're gonna flourish,
if we're gonna flourish as a species.
If our children and grandchildren are gonna have a world
that's livable, let alone a world that could be the world
that we could have, actually.
We are gonna have to become much more skillful
with our own brains.
Because it's our brain.
It's the caveman brain with nuclear weapons
that's ready to attack and exploit them
at the drop of a hat.
We have that inside our head.
I think part of the truth is to,
no matter how much psychology we have in our background,
no matter how many hours in the classroom we've clocked,
no matter how much, you know,
whatever it is that we've done,
we still have that capacity inside us.
If we don't regulate the wolf of hate,
so-called inside our own head,
and feed, and serve, and encourage the wolf of love,
you know, we'll have a world that'll be
in a very, very bad place.
So we have to begin seeing all of us as us.
Yeah, exactly right.
That's how I close the chapter there, as you know.
Yes.
To really see the whole world as us.
Obviously we have to, you know, family's quarrel, squabble,
it's okay, but we don't have to pull out the guns
and put them away.
Right.
And let's finish on one note,
because you referred to it a couple of times,
and it's a very sweet Native American story,
and that is about the wolf of hate
and the wolf of love.
Can you tell that story?
Oh, thank you.
It touches my heart every single time I think about it.
It was told to me that a Native American elder,
a grandmother, was asked toward the end of her life
how she had become so wise, and so well-liked.
Everybody consulted with her,
they wanted her to come to all their parties,
she was just, really, a very admirable, admirable person
who had contributed so much to so many people
that they were very grateful for.
And so they asked her,
"Grandmother, how did you do it?
"How did you become who you are?"
She said, "Well, I know that in my heart are two wolves.
"One of love, and one of hate,
"and that everything depends on which one I feed each day."
Hmm, that says it, that's how we start
reframing things and kind of fixing our own
suffering and pain in life, isn't it?
And one of the nice takeaways here as well
is that little things really add up over time.
If you just restrain the wolf of hate
a little bit more each day,
and feed it less and less,
and if you just start nourishing the wolf of love
more and more each day,
and encouraging it to go out and play,
and to take some chances, and to really take in the good
when the chances you take turn out well.
If you just do that gradually over time,
you're firing those neurons,
therefore you're wiring those neurons,
you're creating more wholesome tendencies.
The Buddha saying is that,
"The mind takes the shape of what it rests upon."
If you increasingly rest the mind upon themes of love,
and you build up the inner strength,
and the assertiveness that enables you to sustain that,
then you build those capacities inside yourself.
You start creating wonderful, positive cycles
outside of you that nourish them further,
and you, you know, lead increasingly
in a direction where you feel happier, you feel more loving,
and you're more able to make this world a better place.
Well that's the best advice we can get,
and just lest we think,
"Well, I'm normally very happy, I'm very positive,
"I don't really feed that wolf of hate."
You brought something up in your book
that was very simple, direct, and poignant,
and that is, you're embarrassed to admit
how much satisfaction you and most people get
watching a film to see the bad guy get it
in the end.
You betcha.
Kill them in the end.
Mm-hmm.
And that is
the wolf of hate.
Wolf of hate.
Yeah.
So even to that degree,
we have to be very diligent
about what we're nurturing, don't we?
That's correct, and understand that.
I think a lot of people activate the wolf of hate
towards their wolf of hate.
In other words, they feel guilty about being aggressive,
or assertive, or angry sometimes.
Or they try to kill the wolf of hate inside,
but the act of killing feeds the wolf of hate,
so you can't do it.
Yes.
The thing to do is to be aware of that,
understand it, hold it with spaciousness,
and not act it out.
And in that moment, you're starving the wolf of hate.
And instead,
And then we can
feed the wolf of love.
just feed, yes.
Well, can't end it any better than that.
Rick, thank you so much
Oh, thank you.
for taking the time to be with us.
This is really a wonderful, as I said before,
handbook to our own brains and our own,
our own sense of peace and well being.
Beautifully done, thank you..
Thank you.
You can pick up a copy of Buddha's Brain
through Amazon or any other major bookseller.
It's a worthwhile journey.
Meanwhile, to hear other fascinating information
about our hard wiring,
you might also enjoy our interview with Joe Dispenza.
Until next time, thanks for watching CMN.
(gentle music)